# The New Breed

**Author:** Kate Darling
**Description:** What Our History with Animals Reveals about Our Future with Robots
**Duration:** 18 min | **Rating:** 4.1/5

---

## INTRODUCTION: What’s in it for me? Get an insider’s perspective on where we stand with robot technology.

You may have heard people like Elon Musk say that artificial intelligence is one of our greatest threats, or read articles about all the jobs that’ll be lost to AI-powered robots. But the truth is, these claims have been around for a long, long time. We’ve been writing and fantasizing about robot uprisings for ages, but we’re still a way off from creating any kind of technology that can replicate or replace the wholly unique human mind. Instead, we’re much closer to creating the kind of technology that can assist and provide the kind of comforts and services that pets and animals have throughout the centuries. Once we start to look at robots in this light, we can gain a much more practical sense of the true benefits and dangers we face. In these blinks, you’ll learn how ferrets helped electrify London; why people hated Microsoft’s Clippy; and what animal rights and robot rights have in common.

---

## CHAPTER 1 OF 6: Future robots are likely to be closer to animals and pets than humans.

Are robots coming for our jobs? Is artificial intelligence one of humanity’s greatest threats? Certainly, there’s no shortage of panicked headlines designed to make us fret over this possibility. But this catastrophic reaction has a lot to do with our persistence in seeing robots as being strictly analogous to human beings. There are good reasons why we tend to think this way, but in the end, it’s both a limited perspective on the benefits robotics can provide, and misleading as to what we should be concerned about. Make no mistake: there will be more robots in the future, but who says they’re going to look or act like humans? The key message here is: Future robots are likely to be closer to animals and pets than humans. Many of us grew up with science-fiction stories involving robots. More often than not, those robots had two arms and two legs, they talked like humans, and their superior strength and intelligence made them seem like a threat to humanity. So, in a way, we’ve been programmed to think they might take our jobs – whether as truck drivers, office workers, or supermarket clerks. But so far, there’s little to suggest that the threat is so imminent. AI is nowhere near the level of the human mind. In fact, a human toddler is better at performing simple tasks such as identifying a glass of water or momentarily stopping a task to pick up something that fell on the floor. Increased computer power is unlikely to resolve this issue. The human mind is simply too complex – too capable of contextualizing new information, switching tasks, and making appropriate decisions. But AI can act like a different kind of autonomous being. It can learn, it can react – albeit in ways that are different from humans, but perhaps not so different from animals. Humans have always found ways to improve their lives through animal relationships. Oxen made it possible to transform agriculture on a mass scale. Horses and camels made long-distance transportation feasible. Dogs helped us hunt for food and became such beloved companions that we consider them family members. These are the kinds of things that robots can already do, or are very close to doing. Instead of replacing human beings, they’re proving to be tools that can assist us and perhaps even improve our well-being. In the following blinks, we’ll look at how our relationships with animals can provide more insight into how we can integrate robots into our lives in the years ahead.

---

## CHAPTER 2 OF 6: We have a long history of working alongside programmed autonomous assistants.

Even before steam-powered engines, electricity, and the industrial revolution, people worried about human jobs being lost to machines. In the early 1800s, the famed Luddites staged an uprising over the deployment of textile machines. But history has shown that, more often than not, technological advances in the workplace have expanded economies and ended up creating more jobs. But when it comes to animals, technology really has displaced some workers for good. And this goes beyond the obvious – like the tractor replacing the ox and the car replacing the horse. The key message here is: We have a long history of working alongside programmed autonomous assistants. You’ve probably heard about the canary in the coal mine, right? Dating back to the eighteenth century, coal miners brought caged canaries into coal mines as an early warning system to detect toxic gases. Nowadays, not only are there more technologically advanced detection systems, in some places people are no longer risking their lives by going underground. In Pilbara, Australia, driverless iron ore transporters are controlled by human miners who sit safely, miles away, in the city of Perth. As in many cases, technology hasn’t replaced humans, it’s made the job more efficient while moving humans out of harm’s way. According to engineer Shaniel Davrajh, of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, there’s no “silver bullet” on the horizon that will lead to humans being removed from mining operations. Robots and AI are simply incapable of working in complex environments where any number of unexpected incidents can arise. Humans are likely always to be needed for these situations. Throughout the years, animals have helped us in countless ways both big and small. Carrier pigeons have performed acts of espionage during numerous conflicts. Ferrets have helped engineers run wires and cables through underground pipes in London. Rats have saved lives by being trained as land-mine detectors. Turkeys have been used as living parachutes to drop food and supplies from airplanes (with the turkey included as a meal after delivery). In all of these cases, people trained autonomous animals for singular purposes, which is more or less what we’re doing with AI and robots today. The famous Watson computer system that outperformed human contestants on Jeopardy! was successful because its singular purpose was to answer questions on Jeopardy!. While Watson isn’t close to capturing human intelligence, if we continue to think of robots as performing the kind of narrow-focused tasks we’ve given to animals, we can continue to use our technological advances in even more incredible ways.

---

## CHAPTER 3 OF 6: By keeping animals in mind we could come up with better designs and laws for robots.

Some supermarkets in the US are already testing out robot employees. These tall machines roam the supermarket floors and alert human employees if there’s a spill or fallen items that need picking up. Unfortunately, the robot can’t clean anything itself, and it’ll sound a clean-up alarm when it runs into a large spill or even a single spinach leaf lying on the floor. In this case, and others like it, robots and automated systems have led to an uptick of what’s been called “fauxtomation.” This is when the addition of something like a self-service kiosk ends up causing technical problems and more work for the employees than they had before. The key message here is: By keeping animals in mind we could come up with better designs and laws for robots. Some will argue that we should be creating human-like robots since our environments are designed for human accessibility and people with two legs. But is that really the most efficient? If you consider the fact that more places already need to be made wheelchair accessible, and that a robot on wheels is far more practical than one trying to balance on two legs, that argument quickly falls apart. When we think of robots making decisions and how to hold them accountable, we tend to think in human terms. What do we do when a robot makes a bad decision or hurts a person? Once again, if we think in terms of animals, we’re likely to get closer to a workable answer. It may sound absurd, but there was a time when we put animals on trial. In the Middle Ages, it wasn’t uncommon to find a pig put on trial if it attacked a child. A French town even put weevils on trial after they’d destroyed a vineyard. Of course, we no longer treat animals like people and we’ve figured out better ways to deal with disputes about farm animals and pets. And this evolution in law may point the way toward how we treat robot responsibilities. For example, many states and countries apply different laws to different animals, depending on the perceived threat. In Austria, the owner of a Rottweiler dog must be sober when they take the dog for a walk – just as though they were driving a car. It’s not hard to imagine similar degrees of regulation put on future robots, and their owners, depending on the level of threat the robots represent to the general public.

---

## CHAPTER 4 OF 6: Good companions robots are taking cues from animals and making strides in helping people.

Do you remember Clippy? Clippy was the name of a virtual assistant in previous versions of Microsoft Word that would sporadically pop up with tips and suggestions. People hated Clippy. Eventually, experts in human-computer interaction were brought in to Microsoft to explain the reason for this hate: Clippy broke the social rules. It popped up without being asked. It commented on what you were doing as though it were sitting in the shadows spying on you. In other words, Clippy was obtrusive and judgmental – exactly the opposite of what a good computerized companion should be. The key message here is: Good companion robots are taking cues from animals and making strides in helping people. Animals have long been beloved and loyal companions to humans. Recently, there’s been research showing just how beneficial their presence can be. While the results are still being debated, there’s solid evidence showing how household pets can lower your cortisol levels, improve your immune system, as well as reduce levels of depression and chronic pain. Plus, unlike Clippy, animals are nonjudgmental. They’re calming and comforting. They remove the burden of social interaction. For these and other reasons, therapy animals have been a growing tool at places like schools, hospitals, and assisted living facilities. Animals like dogs, and sometimes even llamas, come to a facility to simply hang out and provide some comfort and companionship. It’s been an effective tool for those caring for people in pain, children with autism, and those with diagnosed PTSD, mood disorders, or recovering from trauma. But therapy animals have their limitations. There are times when animals aren’t a practical option at all and when they are, they can’t stick around long enough. Which is why robot companions like PARO have emerged. PARO looks like a small, white baby seal. And each one has a unique face, often with big eyes and adorable blinking eyelashes. It reacts when you pet it, offering a soothing purr. The response from many patients and health professionals has been hugely positive. In some cases, time spent with PARO works just as well, if not better, than prescribing a sedative when a patient with dementia becomes agitated. Still, there have been worries about robots like PARO being a replacement for human care, or perhaps leading to less human social interaction. But this is just another example of our tendency to look at robots as threats, rather than seeing them as a tool and more analogous to our rewarding relationship with animals.

---

## CHAPTER 5 OF 6: The strong connections we make with robots could lead to ethical dilemmas.

There’s little doubt that we’re going to continue bringing more robotic devices into our homes. People have already grown used to conversing with digital assistants through their phones and smart speakers, and it’s likely that these kinds of devices will only become more diverse and more capable. There are undeniable advantages to this. Parents of children with autism spectrum disorders have marveled at how AI robots and software like the Siri digital assistant have opened new avenues for improved communication with their kids. But there are real and present risks as well. The key message here is: The strong connections we make with robots could lead to ethical dilemmas. Human beings have a very natural tendency to anthropomorphize robots, or attribute human traits to them. Even with devices like the automated Roomba vacuum cleaner, people will assign names and grow strong attachments. Studies suggest that 80 percent of purchased Roombas have been given names. And iRobot, the company that invented Roomba, has received complaints when customers were offered a replacement after their cleaners were broken. Just as you wouldn’t want a veterinarian to offer you a new dog, customers wanted their Dustin Bieber to be fixed, not replaced. In a similar story, customers of Sony’s AIBO robot dog were heartbroken when it was announced in 2014 that Sony would no longer be supporting repairs. In Japan, some grieving owners allowed their defunct AIBOs to be used for spare parts, not unlike organ donors. Others were able to arrange to have a funeral ceremony for their unrepairable robot dogs at a Buddhist temple. Stories like this may sound innocent enough, but they also reveal how attached people can get, and how far they’d be willing to go to keep their robot companions “alive.” How likely is it that these attachments will be exploited by companies through exorbitant prices on repairs and monthly cloud storage fees? Another concern is surveillance. A memorable example is the Hello Barbie doll, released in 2015, which essentially worked like a chatbot, except it recorded conversations in the customers’ homes and stored them offline. At the time, parents were outraged to learn they were being recorded. In Germany, a similar product known as My Friend Cayla was banned as an illegal surveillance device. But nowadays, so many voice-activated smart devices are being brought into our homes that it’s difficult to know what’s being recorded. While issues over privacy rights will continue to be a factor in the years ahead, so too will the issue of robot rights.

---

## CHAPTER 6 OF 6: In establishing laws to protect robots, we may also improve our animal rights laws.

Let’s say you purchase a robot dog. You bring it home and teach it a whole bunch of adorable tricks. If you then take your robot dog to the park, you probably won’t want someone to walk up and kick it, right? Or, what if the owner was the one stomping on his own robot dog as it flailed and yelped under his foot? Should such behavior be considered acceptable? The issue of robot rights will certainly become more relevant as people continue to add robotic devices to their households – devices that can learn, provide companionship, and even be considered part of the family. In considering robot rights, we could again learn from our history with animals and perhaps even discover ways of improving our current laws and regulations in the process. The key message here is: In establishing laws to protect robots, we may also improve our animal rights laws. To put it simply, our laws around animal rights don’t always make sense. For example, in the US, cockfighting has been outlawed, yet chickens are allowed to be kept in torturous conditions on industrial farm lots. Likewise, in the first few months of 2020 alone, 14 horses died at the Santa Anita racetrack, but America appears no closer to banning horse racing. Ultimately, it seems that animal rights take a backseat when it comes to the food industry and sports of the upper class. These rights are also likely linked to our empathy. We often spring to the defense of dogs and cats, since we’ve had close relationships with these animals and a long history of anthropomorphizing our own human qualities onto them. Pigs have been shown to be just as smart as some dogs, but far fewer people have spent enough time with them to develop empathy. Interestingly enough, we only began to rush to the defense of whales once we discovered that they’re capable of singing beautiful, elaborate songs. When we start to consider the ethical treatment of animals or robots, it quickly becomes apparent what the real questions are. It’s not about how human something is. It’s not about levels of consciousness or whether things can feel pain. The question becomes, what kind of behaviors do we want to promote or deter in our society. In this case, it should be clear that abusing any animal, as well as abusing any robot, either human-like or animal-like, is ultimately unethical and potentially harmful to our society.

---

## CONCLUSION: Final summary

The key message in these blinks: For generations, we’ve been exposed to the idea of robots in the form of human-like machines that are often smarter and stronger than us. Many of us have come to equate robots with a threat to humanity. And with recent advances in artificial intelligence, the concern that robots may take our jobs and have more control over our lives has only increased. But technology is nowhere near the level of replacing the human mind or taking over the jobs that we’re uniquely capable of. Instead, the future of robotics is more likely to be similar to our relationship with animals, which has been historically beneficial in many ways. Robots, like animals, can be tools and companions. They can assist us to perform jobs and achieve otherwise impossible ends. Many questions surround the ethics and potential problems we may face as more robots enter our households, but by looking at our history with animals, we can get a better understanding of how to answer those questions. Got any feedback? We’d love to hear what you think about our content! Just drop an email to remember@blinkist.com with The New Breed as the subject line and share your thoughts!
